Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like these
videos, please subscribe to follow along with the
series. Also, please like and leave a comment,
and share the video to help spread this
free series of videos. Thanks for your help.
In this video we will finish up the topic
of NAT, Network Address Translation.
NAT is topic 4.1 of the CCNA exam.
In Day 44 I introduced NAT and covered static
NAT, but this video will focus on dynamic NAT.
After this video, I think you’ll have no problems
answering any NAT questions on the CCNA exam.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video. First, I
will cover one more point about static NAT that
I didn’t mention in the last video. Then
I’ll cover dynamic NAT, in which you don’t
manually map addresses one-to-one, but instead the
router automatically makes the mappings for you.
And then another very important
type of NAT, dynamic PAT,
which translates not only the IP address, but
also the port number. Dynamic PAT is extremely
useful because it allows many devices to share
a single public IP address. As always, watch
until the end of the video for a bonus practice
question from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
First, some review about static NAT. Static
NAT involves statically configuring one-to-one
mappings of private IP addresses to public
IP addresses. When traffic from the internal
host is sent to the outside network, the
router will translate the source address.
So, I have mapped inside local address
192.168.0.167 to inside global address 100.0.0.1,
and also mapped 192.168.0.168 to 100.0.0.2 Then,
if for example if PC1 wants to access the server
at 8.8.8.8, it sends a packet with source IP
192.168.0.167, a private IP address. R1 then
translates the source address to 100.0.0.1, a
public IP address. When the server sends its
reply, the destination is the public IP address.
R1 translates the destination IP of the reply back
to 192.168.0.167 and forwards it to PC1. Okay,
hopefully you understand this process by now,
but let me demonstrate one other
important point about static NAT.
This one-to-one mapping of IP addresses doesn’t
only allow the internal host to access external
resources, it also allows external hosts to access
the internal host via the inside global address.
So, without PC1 initiating communication
with the server, it could send a packet
to destination IP 100.0.0.1, and because of that
one-to-one IP address mapping R1 would translate
it to 192.168.0.167 and forward it to PC1, and
then PC1 would reply. So, it works two-ways,
not just from inside to outside, but also
from outside to inside. Okay, just wanted
to make that clear since I didn’t mention it
in Day 44. Now let’s move on to dynamic NAT.
In dynamic NAT, the router dynamically maps inside
local addresses to inside global addresses
as needed. So, you don’t manually specify
‘map this IP address to this IP address,
that IP address to that IP address’.
The router makes those mappings automatically, and
then clears the mapping when its no longer needed.
Here’s how it works in Cisco IOS. An ACL is used
to identify which traffic should be translated.
Okay, this part is important, because it’s a
totally different use of an ACL, but it’s a
very common use. ACLs can be used to indicate
which traffic should be forwarded and which
should be blocked, you already know that. But
they can also be used just to identify traffic.
If the source IP of a packet is permitted by the
ACL, the source IP will be translated by NAT.
However if the source IP is denied by the ACL, the
source IP will NOT be translated. But that doesn’t
mean the traffic will be dropped! We’re simply
using the ACL to identify which traffic should be
translated, we’re not using it to drop traffic,
because we won’t apply the ACL to an interface
with the IP ACCESS-GROUP command. Anyway, when
we get to configuration you’ll see how it works.
Then, a NAT pool is used to define the available
inside global addresses that can be used for
translation. For example, on R1 I configured ACL
1, which permits 192.168.0.0/24 and denies all
other traffic. I also configured NAT POOL1,
with a range from 100.0.0.1 to 100.0.0.10.
That means if a packet with a source IP permitted
by ACL 1 arrives, translate the source IP to an
address from POOL1. So, PC1 sends a packet, and
its IP address is permitted by ACL 1. Then R1
translates the source IP to an address from
POOL1, 100.0.0.1. The server sends a reply,
and R1 translates the address back. So, it
looks like the same process as in static NAT.
The difference is that, instead of manually
configuring a mapping from 192.168.0.167
to 100.0.0.1, R1 did it automatically
when the packet from PC1 arrived.
Now, I want to emphasize this point. If the
source IP address is not permitted by the ACL,
it doesn’t mean the packet will be dropped,
it just means it won’t be translated.
Let me explain a few more points about dynamic
NAT, and then we’ll look at the configuration.
Although they are dynamically assigned,
the mappings are still one-to-one,
one inside local IP address per inside global IP
address. If there aren’t enough inside global IP
addresses available, if they are all currently
being used, it is called ‘NAT pool exhaustion’.
In the previous example, the ACL specified a /24
subnet of inside local addresses, but the NAT pool
only had 10 inside global addresses. So, there
can only be 10 translations active at a time.
What happens if there are no available
addresses, but a packet arrives and needs NAT?
If a packet from another inside host arrives and
needs NAT but there are no available addresses,
the router will drop the packet. The host
will be unable to access outside networks
until one of the inside global IP addresses
becomes available. And how does that happen?
Dynamic NAT entries will time out automatically
if not used, or you can clear them manually. So,
in our previous example if PC1 stops
communicating with external hosts for a while,
the inside global address 100.0.0.1 would become
available again for a different host to use.
Or you can use the CLEAR IP NAT TRANSLATION
command anytime to manually clear translations.
Let me demonstrate that NAT pool exhaustion. A
packet with source IP 192.168.0.167 arrives at R1.
It is translated to 100.0.0.1, and then forwarded.
A packet with source IP 192.168.0.168 arrives
and is translated to 100.0.0.2, and then
forwarded. Some other hosts send traffic,
and now those ten inside global IP addresses,
100.0.0.1 through.10, are all being used.
If host 192.168.0.98 tries to send some
traffic to the Internet, what happens?
There are no addresses available, so the router
will drop the packet. But, perhaps 192.168.0.167
stops communicating over the Internet. After
some time, its dynamic translation is removed.
If 192.168.0.98 tries to send that traffic
again, , the 100.0.0.1 address is now available
and it can reach the Internet. So, that’s a
difference between static NAT and dynamic NAT.
Although both are one-to-one mappings, static
NAT mappings are permanent. However dynamic NAT
mappings are temporary, they will time out when
they are no longer needed, and then another host
can use that same public IP address. However,
hosts are still unable to use the same public
IP address at the same time. To do that, you
have to use PAT, Port Address Translation.
But before looking at Port Address Translation,
let’s cover dynamic NAT configuration.
First, just like in static NAT you must
define the inside and outside interfaces.
Then define the traffic that should be translated.
As I mentioned before, traffic permitted by this
ACL will be translated. So, this ACL tells R1
to translate all traffic from 192.168.0.0/24.
Then define the pool of inside global IP
addresses. The command is IP NAT POOL,
then the pool name. After that you
specify the first IP address in the range,
and then the last IP address in the range. So I
specified a range from 100.0.0.0 to 100.0.0.255.
Finally, you have to specify the prefix
length, either with the PREFIX-LENGTH option
or the NETMASK option. IOS uses this to check
if both addresses, the first and last address
of the range, are in the same subnet. If
they aren’t, the command will be rejected.
Finally, configure dynamic NAT by mapping the
ACL to the pool, with IP NAT INSIDE SOURCE,
and then instead of STATIC use LIST, followed
by the ACL number or name, and then POOL,
followed by the pool name. And that’s all there
is to dynamic NAT configuration. It’s a bit more
complicated than static NAT configuration, but
it’s not so difficult. So, with the configurations
complete I sent some traffic from PC1 and PC2 to
8.8.8.8. Let’s check out R1’s translation table.
So, here’s R1’s table after sending pings as
well as DNS traffic to the server at 8.8.8.8.
Notice there are three entries for each
mapping, three for 192.168.0.167 to 100.0.0.1,
and three for 192.168.0.168 to 100.0.0.2. When
the router dynamically creates the inside local to
inside global mappings, these entries are created.
And then when those mappings are actually used,
when translations are made, separate entries like
these UDP entries or these ICMP entries are made.
Now, those UDP and ICMP entries will
be cleared after about a minute,
but the original dynamic mappings themselves
have a default timeout value of 24 hours,
and each time a translation
is made the timer resets.
So, dynamic NAT mappings actually last quite
a long time. You can change the default timers
if you want, but that’s not something you need
to know for the CCNA. Note that, although these
entries look like the static NAT entries from Day
44, if I use the CLEAR IP NAT TRANSLATION command,
these entries will be cleared because
they are not static, they are dynamic.
Now here’s SHOW IP NAT STATISTICS.
Note that I entered this command when all
6 of those translation entries were active,
so it displays 6 total active translations.
6 dynamic entries, and 4 extended.
So, all of those entries were dynamic, but can
you guess which ones are the extended entries?
They are those UDP and ICMP temporary entries
that were cleared after a minute. But again, the
details of extended entries aren’t something you
need to know for the CCNA. What I really want to
point out here is that you can confirm the dynamic
mapping from ACL 1 to POOL1 here. So, just like
with static NAT, the two SHOW commands you should
know for dynamic NAT are SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATIONS
and SHOW IP NAT STATISTICS. You should be familiar
with both of these commands for the CCNA exam.
Now let’s move to PAT, Port Address Translation,
which is also known as NAT overload.
It translates both the IP address and the
port number of a packet, if necessary.
And what’s the purpose of translating the port
number? By using a unique port number for each
communication flow between internal hosts and
external hosts, a single public IP address can
be used by many different internal hosts. TCP
and UDP port numbers are 16 bits in length,
which means there are over 65,000 port numbers.
Then, the router will keep track of which inside
local address is using which inside global
address and port. So, the router will keep
track of the communication flows by using unique
port numbers for each flow. Let me demonstrate.
PC1 sends a DNS message to 8.8.8.8. Its source IP
is 192.168.0.167, and it selects a random source
port, 54321. PC2 also sends a DNS message
to 8.8.8.8, with source IP 192.168.0.168.
It also selects a random source port, and it
happens to choose the same source port as PC1,
54321. R1 translates the source IP of PC1’s
message to 100.0.0.1, and keeps the source
port the same, 54321. For PC2’s message, it
also translates the source IP to 100.0.0.1,
but it changes the source port to 54322. Why
does it do that? It’s so it can keep track of
the communication flows. If both flows
use the same source IP and source port,
when the replies come from the server, R1
won’t know which reply to send to which PC.
So, the server sends the replies to
R1. Both have destination IP 100.0.0.1,
but one has destination port 54321, and the
other 54322. Because of the unique port numbers,
R1 knows to send this reply to PC1 and this reply
to PC2. In this example, both PCs selected the
same random source port number, because I wanted
to show the router translating the source port.
However, if PC2 selected a different
random source port than PC1,
then R1 would have no need
to translate the source port.
It would simply use the source port PC2 selected
and use that to keep track of the sessions.
So, that’s how PAT works. Because many inside
hosts can share a single public IP, PAT
is very useful for preserving public IP addresses,
and it is used in networks all over the world.
Of the three types we have covered, static
NAT, dynamic NAT, and PAT, PAT is the most
widely used because it allows so many inside
hosts to share a single public IP address.
Here’s how to configure PAT. It’s basically the
same as dynamic NAT, you just add one keyword. So,
first define the inside and outside interfaces.
Then, define which traffic should be translated
by using an ACL. Again, traffic permitted by the
ACL will be translated. Then define the pool of
inside global IP addresses. This time I defined
a smaller range, from 100.0.0.0 to 100.0.0.3.
Chances are, unless the internal network is
very large, you won’t need more than a single
IP address, but this provides some scalability,
some room for growth. Note that I still specified
a prefix length of 24 bits. As long as the
specified address range is in the same subnet,
this specified prefix length doesn’t
really matter. 100.0.0.0 through 100.0.0.3
all fit in the subnet 100.0.0.0/24, so the command
is valid. Finally, the NAT statement itself.
It’s the same as for dynamic NAT, except at
the end you use the keyword OVERLOAD. IP NAT
INSIDE SOURCE LIST 1 POOL POOL1 OVERLOAD. So,
PC1 and PC2 both send DNS requests to 8.8.8.8.
Let’s take a look at the NAT
translations and statistics on R1.
So, here are the translations on R1. One big
difference compared to regular dynamic NAT
is that those one-to-one dynamic mapping entries
aren’t displayed. That’s because, when using PAT,
there are no one-to-one mappings, they’re many
to one. Many inside local addresses to one
inside global address. As you can see, both
192.168.0.167 and .168 are using 100.0.0.1.
They both selected different source port numbers,
so R1 didn’t need to translate the port numbers.
It will use port number 63925 to track the
communication flow between PC1 and 8.8.8.8,
and it will use port number 59549 to track the
communication flow between PC2 and 8.8.8.8.
And here’s SHOW IP NAT STATISTICS. Feel free
to pause the video to check out the output if
you’re interested, but now I’m going to move on
to show you one more useful way to configure PAT.
One more way to configure PAT, and probably
the more common way, is to configure the
router to use its own public IP address
when translating the source IP of packets.
So, as always you must configure the inside
and outside interfaces on the router.
And then just like before use an ACL to
define which traffic should be translated.
Here’s the difference with the
previous method of configuring PAT.
Instead of specifying a POOL
and then the OVERLOAD keyword,
you specify INTERFACE, then the outside
interface, g0/0 in R1’s case, and then OVERLOAD.
So, R1 will translate the source IP address of
packets from 192.168.0.0/24 to the IP address of
its G0/0 interface, 203.0.113.1. It will also use
a unique source port number for each traffic flow,
so it can keep track of them and multiple
internal hosts can share that single IP address.
Let me demonstrate that. PC1 and PC2
both send DNS requests to 8.8.8.8.
Notice that they both selected a different random
source port. 65205 for PC1 and 59641 for PC2.
R1 translates the source IP address of both
packets, changing them to the IP of R1’s
G0/0 interface, 203.0.113.1. Because both
source port numbers are already different,
there is no need to translate the port numbers.
The server sends the replies, and R1 translates
them back and sends them to their correct
destinations. Because of the unique port numbers,
R1 knows which to translate back to 192.168.0.167
and which to translate back to 192.168.0.168.
Here is R1’s NAT translation table after that.
Notice that both 192.168.0.167 and .168
are using R1’s IP address, 203.0.113.1.
Also notice that, as I said, there was no need
for R1 to translate the source port numbers,
because they were already unique. And here is SHOW
IP NAT STATISTICS. Again, feel free to pause and
check this command out if you want, but going in
depth into all of the output here isn’t necessary.
Here are the new commands
we covered in this video.
If you don’t remember these commands, go back
in the video to review, and also make sure to
practice them in packet tracer either by making
your own labs or by doing my practice labs.
Before moving on to the quiz, let’s
review what we covered in this video.
First, I demonstrated how static NAT not only
allows inside hosts to access external networks,
but it also allows hosts on external
networks to access the internal hosts
using the mapped inside global IP address. Then I
covered dynamic NAT and dynamic PAT. Dynamic PAT
is probably the most common type of NAT. It allows
many internal hosts to share a single public IP,
all at the same time. My home router, for
example, has a single public IP address, and all
of the devices in my home such as my PC, phones
connected to Wi-Fi, etc, all share the single
public IP address when accessing the Internet. And
make sure to watch until the end of the quiz for
a bonus question from Boson Software’s ExSim
for CCNA. Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
Which of the following NAT types best fulfills
the goal of preserving public IPv4 addresses?
Pause the video now to think about your answer.
Okay, the answer is D, NAT Overload, aka PAT.
NAT Overload allows many internal hosts to
use a single public IP address because the
router keeps track of communication flows
using the Layer 4 port number. This means most
networks only need a single public IP address,
instead of each device requiring a unique
public IP address. Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following dynamic NAT
configurations will translate inside
local addresses from 172.16.1.0/24 to
addresses from the subnet 203.0.113.0/25?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
Okay, the answer is B. So, what’s wrong with
A and C? In A, the pool’s netmask is correct,
255.255.255.128 is /25, but the address range is
203.0.113.0 to 203.0.113.255. 203.0.113.255 does
not fall in the 203.0.113.0/25 subnet, so the
router would reject this command. How about C?
The ACL’s mask is 255.255.255.0, but
ACLs are supposed to use wildcard masks,
so /24 should be 0.0.0.255.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Dynamic NAT is configured on R1 and a pool
of 10 inside global addresses is specified.
Currently, all 10 addresses
are being used by inside hosts,
but another inside host attempts
to send a packet over the Internet.
What does R1 do with this packet? Pause
the video now to think about the answer.
Okay, the answer is B, it discards the packet.
When dynamic NAT is being used and a packet
requires NAT, but there are no available
addresses in the pool, the router will simply
discard the packet. Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following dynamic NAT
configurations will translate inside
local addresses from 10.0.1.0/27 to use the
IP address of the router’s G0/1 interface?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
Okay the answer is A. It’s the
only option that uses the correct
/27 wildcard mask in the ACL,
the correct IP NAT command,
and assigns the inside and outside interfaces
correctly. Okay, let’s go to question 5.
After specifying the inside
and outside NAT interfaces,
you issue the following commands on R1. What
will happen to hosts from the 192.168.1.0/24
subnet? Pause the video now
to think about the answer.
Okay, the answer is C, the packets
they send will not be translated by
R1. When an ACL is used to identify
which traffic should be translated,
such as in dynamic NAT and PAT, packets
permitted by the ACL will be translated,
and packets denied by the ACL won’t be translated.
Even though the ACL denies the packets,
it doesn’t mean the router will drop the packets,
it just won’t translate them. Okay, that’s all
for the quiz. Now let’s take a look at a bonus
question from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
Okay, here's today's Boson ExSim practice
question. HostA is attempting to initiate
an HTTP connection to HostB through a NAT router
named RouterA. The devices use the following IP
addresses. Here they are. Which of the following
lines of output would you expect to be displayed
when you issue the SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATIONS
command on RouterA? Select the best answer.
Okay, pause the video now. Take a look at
these options and select the best answer.
Okay let's check. So, first off, what should the
outside local and outside global addresses be?
They should be the IP address of the destination
host, that is HostB, 192.0.2.28. So all of these
are correct. Now how about the inside
local address, what should that be?
That should be the IP address of the source host,
so the actual IP address configured on HostA in
this case. So, 10.1.7.7. So that means A and D are
incorrect. Their inside local address is 10.1.7.1,
which is the IP address of RouterA's internal
interface, and that is not correct. So,
the correct answer is either B or C. Now, how
about the inside global IP address? Should that be
10.1.7.1, like in B, or 203.0.113.62? So, 10.1.7.1
is the IP address of RouterA's internal interface,
and 203.0.113.62 is the IP address of RouterA's
external interface. Now, when doing PAT
and translating to the IP address of the router's
interface, you should translate to the IP
address of the external interface, the public IP
address. So, that means C is the correct answer.
So I will click on show answer and indeed that
is correct. So, here is Boson's explanation of
that answer. You can pause the video now to read
this explanation. And there's some more down here.
Okay, so that was a quick look at
Boson Software's ExSim for CCNA.
These are without a doubt the best practice
exams for the CCNA, and I highly recommend
them. If you want to get Boson ExSim, please
follow the link in the video description.
There are supplementary materials for this video.
There is a flashcard deck to
use with the software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video. Sign up for my
mailing list via the link in the description,
and I’ll send you all of the flashcards
and packet tracer lab files for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want
to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button under the
video. Thank you to Anand, Pavel, Abraham, Serge,
Njoku, Viktor, Roger, Raj, Kenneth, Seamus, H
W, Brandon, Aaron, Marcel, Kone, Donald, C Mohd,
Gustavo, Anthony, Benjamin, Justin, Prakaash,
Nasir, Erlison, Marko, Daming, Ed, Value, John,
Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Mark, Yousif, Boson
Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at the
time of recording by the way, March 24th 2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.